Enhancements to the BackendTLSPolicy GEP (#3835)
kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api: geps/gep-1897/index.md

## TLDR

This document aims to address the use case of origination of TLS to backends from implementations.

> This is accomplished by a new BackendTLSPolicy API.

Reviewer: I object to this obfuscation of the intent of BackendTLSPolicy.

Reviewer: Everything cannot just be removed.  Please enumerate all the use cases, and keep this original use case, as described.

Author: Sorry I was doing some rewording/moving things around and didn't complete before I pushed out a WIP since it appeared there was heavy demand to have some signal of progress. Didnt expect everyone to actually start looking while it was in Draft mode! Definitely will have the use cases

> This API solves the question "As an implementation, when I establish a connection to a backend, should I originate a TLS connection? If so, with what properties?"

Reviewer: A backend is what is on the receiving side of the Gateway as client.   Can you come up with a different term than "backend" for a service that is not the targeted endpoint of a Gateway?

## Goals

This GEP aims to solve the following use cases:

> 1. As a application developer
> 
> 1. The solution must satisfy the following use case: the backend pod has its own

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. As an application developer

2. The solution must satisfy the following use case: the backend pod has its own
```

## TLDR

This document aims to address the use case of origination of TLS to backends from implementations.

> This is accomplished by a new `BackendTLSPolicy` API.

Reviewer: For clarity, please include the original use case plus your new use case(s).  Chihiro should be able to read this document and know what API components are affected.

use case “As a client implementation of Gateway API, I need to know how to connect to
a backend pod that has its own certificate”. TLS configuration can be a nebulous topic,
so in order to drive resolution this GEP focuses only on this single piece of functionality.
This document aims to address the use case of origination of TLS to backends from implementations.
This is accomplished by a new `BackendTLSPolicy` API.

Furthermore, for Gateway API to handle the case where the service or backend owner is doing their own TLS, _and_
the service or backend owner wants to validate the clients connecting to it, two things need to happen:
This API solves the question "As an implementation, when I establish a connection to a backend, should I originate a TLS connection? If so, with what properties?"

- The service or backend owner has to provide a method for the Gateway owner to retrieve a certificate.

> - Gateway API has to provide a way for the Gateway to configure and apply the validation options.

Reviewer: Why remove this?

Reviewer: Yes.  We've lost context by removing all of this.

> * A service mesh accepts plaintext traffic (`http://google.com:80`) from a client, then originates HTTPS to that destination (`https://google.com:443`).

Reviewer 3: Hang on a sec, is this for _outbound_ client requests? That are leaving the cluster? Is this Egress config by default? What does the backend Service look like in this case?

I can totally see how this config _could_ be used for that, but including `ExternalName` Services is a _very_ large change here, and I'm not sure we should open that can of worms yet (if that's what you mean).

Reviewer 4: +1 to everything john said. FWIW - We (GKE) intend to do something similar for external services.

Author: It's not a goal or an API proposal - it's just a statement of how many of the implementations *will* and *already do* use the API. I can remove it from the GEP if we do not want that information I suppose

Reviewer 3: That's great, but this GEP is already increasing quite a bit in scope, I'd rather keep it tighter please.

1. The solution must satisfy the following use case: the backend pod has its own
certificate and the gateway implementation client needs to know how to connect to the
backend pod. (Use case #4 in [Gateway API TLS Use Cases](#references))
2. The gateway implementation (`Gateway` instance or service mesh client proxy) must have final control over security properties
3. The application developer may provide *hints* or *defaults* to consumers on how to connect to their application.

## Non-Goals

A major non-goal for this proposal is for configuration of the service mesh transport security.
It is very common for service mesh implementations to implement some form of transparent transport security, whether that is WireGuard, mTLS, or others.
This is completely orthogonal to the use cases being tackled by this GEP.

* The "mesh transport security" is something invisible to the user's application, and is simply used to secure communication between components in the mesh.
* This proposal, instead, explicitly calls for sending TLS **to the user's application**.

Whether the service mesh implementation uses mTLS or not, the mesh transport security is not relevant to this proposal.

> A service mesh using mTLS can *additionally* originate TLS that is terminated by the users application (that is, two layers of TLS!).

Author: I am trying to clarify the distinction between "application TLS" and "mesh transport security" to explain that this GEP has nothing to do with mesh transport security. Its a very very common source of confusion so important to clarify

## Non-Goals

These are worthy goals, but will not be covered by this GEP.
A major non-goal for this proposal is for configuration of the service mesh transport security.
It is very common for service mesh implementations to implement some form of transparent transport security, whether that is WireGuard, mTLS, or others.
This is completely orthogonal to the use cases being tackled by this GEP.

* The "mesh transport security" is something invisible to the user's application, and is simply used to secure communication between components in the mesh.
* This proposal, instead, explicitly calls for sending TLS **to the user's application**.

Whether the service mesh implementation uses mTLS or not, the mesh transport security is not relevant to this proposal.
A service mesh using mTLS can *additionally* originate TLS that is terminated by the users application (that is, two layers of TLS!).

![](images/mesh.png "Mesh transport")

Possible future goals outside of the scope of this GEP include:

1. Changes to the existing mechanisms for edge or passthrough TLS termination
2. Providing a mechanism to decorate multiple route instances
3. TLSRoute use cases

> 4. UDPRoute use cases

Reviewer: Please don't remove.

5. Controlling TLS versions or cipher suites used in TLS handshakes. (Use case #5 in [Gateway API TLS Use Cases](#references))
6. Controlling certificates used by more than one workload (#6 in [Gateway API TLS Use Cases](#references))
7. Client certificate settings used in TLS **from external clients to the
Listener** (#7 in [Gateway API TLS Use Cases](#references))

> 8. Providing a mechanism for the cluster operator to override gateway to backend TLS settings.

Reviewer: Please don't remove.

Reviewer 5: I think this has now effectively been split off into a separate GEP (https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/3876)

Reviewer 3: Yes, GEP-3875 is now the gateway override for the config that's in this GEP.

> 

Reviewer 6: @candita as a primary stakeholder here: is it your interpretation that the semantic changes here are ultimately compatible with the implementations who have already adopted the current API?

Reviewer: @shaneutt no that's not my interpretation.  Furthermore, the language changes are not something that can be inserted or reviewed in a hurry.  I recommend changing the GEP as little as possible instead of overhauling it, so that it can be reviewed more easily.

1. The solution must satisfy the following use case: the backend pod has its own
certificate and the gateway implementation client needs to know how to connect to the
backend pod. (Use case #4 in [Gateway API TLS Use Cases](#references))

> 2. Both the application developer persona, and gateway operator persona will have control over TLS settings.

Reviewer 4: > and gateway operator persona

IIUC this moved to a separate GEP. please correct me if misunderstood.  so should we move this to long term goal?

Author: I will mention this is a future goal thanks!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. In this GEP, only the application developer persona will have control over TLS settings. This does not preclude adding other personas in future GEPs.
```

Or something like that maybe?

3. The solution should consider client TLS settings used in the TLS handshake **from

> Gateway to backend**, such as server name indication and trusted CA certificates.

Author: I could be wrong but I don't think there are any other certs we are trusting here _other than_ CA certificates.

For example, this is equivalent of the Go field in their TLS config:
```
// RootCAs defines the set of root certificate authorities
	// that clients use when verifying server certificates.
	// If RootCAs is nil, TLS uses the host's root CA set.
	RootCAs *[x509](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/x509).[CertPool](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/x509#CertPool)
```

Maybe you could help me understand what is being trusted if not a CA cert?

> Gateway to backend**, such as server name indication and trusted CA certificates.

Reviewer: You're right, both WellKnownCACertificatesSystem  and CACertficateRefs are CA certificates.  I would like to keep a reference to the well known (trusted) system CA certificates as well as other CA certificates, instead of combining them into one thing.

> Gateway to backend**, such as server name indication and trusted CA certificates.

Reviewer 5: The idea with BackendTLSPolicy is that you're configuring which CA Certs you trust. You can either list specific CA Certs, or just say that you trust the system ones, but in both cases, they're just trusted CA Certs. I don't think we really need to differentiate here.

> 4. Both Gateway and Mesh use cases will be supported.

Reviewer: If we already have an experimental Gateway-only implementation, we cannot require that they add Mesh use cases in order to claim a Standard implementation.  I don't think that's made clear here.

Author: This is definitely not the intent! Gateway API currently has different profiles for Mesh and Gateways, so all of the existing non-Mesh implementations do not run the 'Mesh' profile, and are not impacted in any way by any mesh features.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. Both Gateway and Mesh use cases may be supported, depending on the implementation, and will be covered by features in each case.
```

## Non-Goals

A major non-goal for this proposal is for configuration of the service mesh transport security.
It is very common for service mesh implementations to implement some form of transparent transport security, whether that is WireGuard, mTLS, or others.
This is completely orthogonal to the use cases being tackled by this GEP.

> * The "mesh transport security" is something invisible to the users application, and is simply used to secure communication between components in the mesh.
> * This proposal, instead, explicitly calls for sending TLS **to the users application**.

Reviewer 2: Sorry. What's the "user's application" in this context? I imagine it's an application that an Application Developer (Ana) develops and deploys to the mesh. Just to be clear who the "user" is here.

```suggestion
* The "mesh transport security" is something invisible to the user's application, and is simply used to secure communication between components in the mesh.
* This proposal, instead, explicitly calls for sending TLS **to the user's application**.
```

Reviewer 7: AFAIU user application means the application process, and not the sidecar/node-proxy

Reviewer: Please use Gateway API terminology to explain this.

Whether the service mesh implementation uses mTLS for it's implementation is not relevant to this proposal.

> A service mesh using mTLS can *additionally* originate TLS that is terminated by the users application (that is, two layers of TLS!).

Reviewer 7: suggest adding what it means for Authz enforcement on L7 attributes (that are now encrypted and invisible to the mesh)

Author: I am worried about adding too much confusion here based on other comments where ~any service mesh comment is adding confusion

2. HTTPS passthrough use cases (#2 in [Gateway API TLS Use Cases](#references))
3. Termination of TLS for non-HTTP TCP streams (#3 in [Gateway API TLS Use Cases](#references))

> These existing use cases all relate to how a Gateway implementation should handle a downstream connection.
> This GEP, instead, focuses on the handling of upstream connections.

Reviewer: Please use the agreed-upon terminology from https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/gep-2907/#frontend-and-backend.

```suggestion
These existing use cases relate to how a Gateway implementation should handle a frontend or passthrough connection.
This GEP, instead, focuses on the handling of backend connections.
```

including (but not limited to):

* intent to use TLS on the backend hop
* CA certificates to trust
* other properties of the TLS handshake, such as SNI and SAN validation

> * client certificate of the gateway (outside of scope for this GEP)

Reviewer: System certificates should remain - this was added by request and is not going away.
Why is client certificate of the Gateway now outside of scope for this GEP?

Author: Because its not specified in the GEP...? Client certificate (mutual TLS) is covered in https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/gep-3155, not this GEP -- that doesn't change with this PR.

Maybe I misunderstood the question

* A service producer may provide TLS settings that are unacceptable to the client. For example, an `insecureSkipVerify` option. The client can override this with their own more secure settings.
* A service may be connected from a variety of context, some requiring TLS origination and others not. Allowing client-driven control allows both of these to co-exist.

The `BackendTLSPolicy` must contain these configuration items to allow the Gateway to operate successfully
as a TLS Client:

- An explicit signal that TLS should be used by this connection.
- A hostname the Gateway should use to connect to the backend.
- How to verify the peer certificate, including signing certificate verification and other properties of the certificate (subject alt names).
  - Support for referencing a CA certificate, as well as a help to use the default trusted system certificates.

To serve these dual roles, `BackendTLSPolicy` is usable as a Direct Policy Attachment that can be *cross namespace*.

* `BackendTLSPolicy` can be applied to a Service in the same namespace to provide defaults to clients.

> * `BackendTLSPolicy` can be applied to a Service in a different namespace to provide explicit configuration for clients in that namespace.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* `BackendTLSPolicy` can be applied to a Service in a different namespace to provide explicit configuration for clients in the origin namespace, be it Gateway or in-cluster workload in a mesh.
```

"that" is a bit unclear here, better to be more specific ("the BackendTLSPolicy's namespace" could be another option).

> * `BackendTLSPolicy` can be applied to a Service in a different namespace to provide explicit configuration for clients in that namespace.

Reviewer 3: Another option, that would also help with later explanations, is to call these two uses the "producer usage" (for same-namespace), and the "consumer usage" (for cross-namespace).

Many folks reading this may only be reading this document for north-south use cases and may not be familiar with the terminology we've used for GAMMA, so maybe links to the Glossary might also be helpful.

> * `BackendTLSPolicy` can be applied to a Service in a different namespace to provide explicit configuration for clients in that namespace.

Author: Good call. I think we need to be more explicit about this, even for the same-namespace use case.

So lets start with same-namespace. We have the Service,ConfigMap, and BackendTLSPolicy in `ns-svc` but the callers may be in many namespaces. I believe the behavior should be that this configuration _implicitly authorizes_ the Gateways in other namespaces to access the ConfigMap.

Note this is, in theory, a privilege escalation. A user with BTP write access but not ConfigMap read access can now expose a ConfigMap they could not otherwise. However, this is a very weird permission stance and the ConfigMap is a public CA cert (not a private key, etc) so I think this is perfectly acceptable.

For cross namespace its a bit weirder. Can I, in `ns-other` give myself access to a ConfigMap in `ns-svc` without ns-svc otherwise granting me access? I would say **no**. This leads to the following options:
1. Add cross-ns reference requiring ReferenceGrant
2. Make consumers reference things in their own namespace. They may need to copy the configmap, or maybe not -- note there may not even be a configmap to begin with! If I am, today, deploying a service on Kubernetes I am probably not writing the CA cert into a configmap for example.

Note if we pick (1) then users can always do (2) as well.

WDYT? Also @mikemorris may have some opinions here.

I am good to start with (2) and add (1) if we need it as well

> * `BackendTLSPolicy` can be applied to a Service in a different namespace to provide explicit configuration for clients in that namespace.

Reviewer 3: I'm _strongly_ in favor of 1, because I really don't want implicit behavior about cross-namespace references. 2 is fine, but we _need_ to maintain that cross-namespace references _must_ have an explicit two-way handshake.

![image depicting TLS termination types](images/1897-TLStermtypes.png "TLS termination types")

Gateway API is missing a mechanism for separately providing the details for the backend TLS handshake,

> including (but not limited to):

Reviewer: Why remove this?

> This includes the intent to originate TLS on the connection to the backend, as well as various properties of the TLS connection:

Reviewer 3: Need a blank line here for the Markdown renderer.

* How to verify the peer certificate (trusted certificates, trusted subject names, etc).

> * Server Name indication

Author: The original GEP actually had wording about mTLS, and since then there has been work outside of this GEP on mTLS. I do not care to change the state of mTLS in this GEP (do keep scope down), merely meant to not remove existing claims.

I will remove since it seems to add confusion.

> ## Purpose - why do we want to do this?

Reviewer 5: Now that the majority of changes are in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/3876, I think this can be resolved.

Because naming is hard, a new name may be
substituted without blocking acceptance of the content of the API change.

The selection of the applicable Gateway API persona is important in the design of BackendTLSPolicy, because it provides
a way to explicitly describe the _expectations_ of the connection to the application.  BackendTLSPolicy is configured
by the application developer Gateway API persona to signal what the application developer _expects_ in connections to

> the application, from a TLS perspective.  Only the application developer can know what the application expects, so it is

Author: As mentioned https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/3835#discussion_r2132983282 removing this language is one of the primary goals of this PR

> The Gateway API cannot control the server behavior.

Reviewer: I daresay:
```suggestion
The Gateway API cannot control the server behavior, so we've created the BackendTLSPolicy to signal what the application developer _expects_ in connections to
the server, from a TLS perspective.
```

Author: This is 100% an intended change of the semantics of the API to declare that the API declared "you should use TLS to connect with these properties". This is fundamentally different than the sentence above

This is a choice the application developer makes in their code, whether or not (and how) they serve TLS.

> The application developer may not even be aware of the Gateway API at all.

Author: I'm not sure I understand why it's irrelevant. One of the use case I'm interested to solve is having gateway send TLS to services without the service owner configuring anything and instead having the consumer configure it. 

At enterprise scale this comes up with ~every customer that they cannot go and make service producers configure random client-side properties.

> Therefor, the goal of this API is to tell the client *whether or not* and *how* to originate TLS to the backend.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Therefore, the goal of this API is to tell the client *whether or not* and *how* to originate TLS to the backend.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, the goal of this API is to tell the gateway *whether or not* and *how* to originate TLS to the backend.
```

Author: @candita I have specifically tried to avoid the term "gateway" because the proposal is not limited to `Gateway`s but also service mesh.

However, in many common cases these roles are actually inverted.
While it is ultimately the client that must decide how to connect, commonly they are unaware of the details of the destination.

> In these situations, an application developer may wish to actually tell the clients how *they* should connect.

Reviewer: This doesn't make sense.  BackendTLSPolicy already tells the gateway how to connect.

Author: In the current GEP the semantics of the API are said to be "this service expects TLS". 

When a gateway implementation needs to call a backend it needs to decide "should I add TLS or not?" - this is a different statement than "the service expects TLS". 

One is a declaration to the implementation on how to behave and the other is an ambiguous declaration of intent. Security + ambiguity is typically not a great combination. 

As an analogy, HTTPRoute doesn't say "the destination expects the 'foo' header" but rather says "the client shall set the 'foo' header to 'bar'" .

*However* it's pretty common that in practice you want to service producer to tell you how to connect, but it's a different statement: it is "here is how you should connect to me" vs "I expect TLS". 

---

The current API already violates the objective of the application developer declaring how they wish to be connected to, anyways, as it includes validation logic. The application developer doesn't care how the client verifies its certificate (or if it even does at all)!

Fortunately, these two scenarios can co-exist.

> `BackendTLSPolicy` will allow an application developer to present a *default* for clients that have not configured their own, but also allow clients to explicitly configure their own settings.

Reviewer 5: I think part of John's concerns here are that this policy is actually covering two distinct personas, which we typically try to avoid. With Gateway TLS termination, we're configuring _everything_ because we (the Gateway) is the thing doing the termination. With BackendTLSPolicy we're actually more focused on configuring how the client (Gateway) connects to a backend, specifically:

1) Defining how clients (Gateways) should connect to the backend with config such as SNI
2) Defining what clients (Gateways) should _trust_ from this backend, particularly the CA Certs we trust and the SANs we expect to be part of a served cert (if different from SNI)

Although the application developer is often the best equipped person to configure this as they have all the information required, it feels a bit backwards for them to be telling a client what the client should trust.

> `BackendTLSPolicy` will allow an application developer to present a *default* for clients that have not configured their own, but also allow clients to explicitly configure their own settings.

Reviewer: I still don't see how this covers two distinct personas.  Historically, at the very beginning all we wanted was a way for the app dev to add this to the xRoute or listener, and allow the Gateway to use that to connect.  It got formed into BackendTLSPolicy only because we didn't think the app dev should be configuring listeners, and because we expected people to complain about having to touch every single xRoute that targeted their Services.

> `BackendTLSPolicy` will allow an application developer to present a *default* for clients that have not configured their own, but also allow clients to explicitly configure their own settings.

Reviewer 5: > It got formed into BackendTLSPolicy only because we didn't think the app dev should be configuring listeners

IMO the primary reason BackendTLSPolicy exists as a Service policy is that we expect each Service to have different config, particularly in terms of SNI and SANs. Trying to configure that globally for all apps a Gateway or Listener is routing traffic to would be quite difficult.

> This serves a variety of use cases:

Reviewer 3: Need another blank link here for the Markdown renderer.

> * A service producer may be unaware or unwilling to provide a `BackendTLSPolicy` for clients, despite serving TLS. In this case, a client can provide their own settings to connect

Author: I am not sure what that would look like. I think as a project we should aim to avoid proliferation of CRDs so we do not end up with things like OverrideBackendTLSPolicy and BackendTLSPolicy and instead just have 1 resource that can fulfil both cases.

Arguable even a CRD dedicated to TLS is too fine grained, but I won't go down that rabbit whole

>   * Alternatively, a service producer may be unsure of how clients are connecting to them. `BackendTLSPolicy` implies *originating* TLS from the implementation, but the implementation could already be handling passthrough TLS.

Reviewer: It makes sense to me that the implementation should recognize when passthrough is configured, and skip the BackendTLSPolicy in that case.

Author: Avoiding this was intentional. Having a security policy that is bypassed because the implementation attempts to be smart is a very tricky scenario. This opens the door to easily misconfigured security policies, and also breaks actual use cases where a user _does_ want the policy to apply.

> * A service producer may provide TLS settings that are unacceptable to the client. For example, an `insecureSkipVerify` option. The client can override this with their own more secure settings.

Author: I am not sure what you mean, can you clarify? The application does not check the BackendTLSPolicy?

> * A service may be connected from a variety of context, some requiring TLS origination and others not. Allowing client-driven control allows both of these to co-exist.

Reviewer: These should be able to co-exist already using two or more targetRefs on the policy.  These are type [LocalPolicTargetReferenceWithSectionName](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/blob/main/apis/v1alpha2/policy_types.go#L84-L101 ) with sectionName corresponding to port name for a Service.

Author: I believe this comment has been addressed by the recent changes that are now utilizing targetRefs. Please LMK if I misunderstood

The `BackendTLSPolicy` must contain these configuration items to allow the Gateway to operate successfully
as a TLS Client:

- An explicit signal that TLS should be used by this connection.
- A hostname the Gateway should use to connect to the backend.
- How to verify the peer certificate, including signing certificate verification and other properties of the certificate (subject alt names).
  - Support for referencing a CA certificate, as well as a help to use the default trusted system certificates.

> Two serve these dual roles, `BackendTLSPolicy` is usable in two contexts:

Reviewer 3: Blank line again.

> Two serve these dual roles, `BackendTLSPolicy` is usable in two contexts:

Reviewer 8: Looking from `Ana` perspective, I would like to see a guideline (or strong rules) helping me to choose between setting the policy as a direct Service attachment and HTTP Route override.
For example can Ana define BackendTLSPolicy as Route override for defining Application TLS instead of using direct Service Attachment?  I don't see any constraints in this GEP to stop Ana from doing that and IMO this is sth we need to avoid.

* As a Direct Policy Attachment, `BackendTLSPolicy` can be applied to a Service in the same namespace.

> * As a Route backend ExtensionRef filter, a `BackendTLSPolicy` can be applied to override the service-attached policy, if any. This must exist in the same namespace as the Route (note: the extensionRef does not allow cross-namespace references, anyways).

Reviewer 4: re: As a Route backend ExtensionRef filter

Is the route in this context is a consumer route?

Author: Definitely HTTPBackendRef was the intent. Will make it more clear and maybe add some examples. 

Thanks!

> If a selected backend has both a service-attached and a backend filter, the backend filter takes precedence.

Reviewer 4: can u please correct my understanding: if both gateways and meshes consume backend tls policy API, then how do cases where gateway has a mesh sidecar attached work? would the mesh sidecar (or whatever) would see gateway's tls request and try to do tls passthrough ignoring backend tls policy API?

Reviewer 4: i assumed that this policy would apply to both gateway and mesh. lmk if this is not the case.

As TLS is originated by the client, the ultimate decision in how that is done must also lie with the client.

Failures during the TLS handshake may be handled with implementation-specific error codes, such as 500 or 503, or
other signal that makes the failure sufficiently clear to the requester without revealing too much about the transaction,
based on established security requirements.

BackendTLSPolicySpec contains the `Mode`, `TargetRefs` and `Validation` fields.

* The `Validation` field is a `BackendTLSPolicyValidation` and contains `CACertificateRefs`, `WellKnownCACertificates`, and `Hostname`.

> * The `TargetRefs` is optional. It must be set when providing defaults for a Service, and must not be set when providing route level overrides.

Reviewer: @guicassolato mentioned that removing the TargetRefs requirement makes this no longer a policy.

> * The `Mode` field allows configuring the TLS mode. To start with, this will include `None` and `TLS`, though future versions will likely include a `MutualTLS` option. The `None` mode is useful when overriding on the route level; it is rejected if `TargetRefs` is ste.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
* The `Mode` field allows configuring the TLS mode. To start with, this will include `None` and `TLS`, though future versions will likely include a `MutualTLS` option. The `None` mode is useful when overriding on the route level; it is rejected if `TargetRefs` is set.
```

> * The `Mode` field allows configuring the TLS mode. To start with, this will include `None` and `TLS`, though future versions will likely include a `MutualTLS` option. The `None` mode is useful when overriding on the route level; it is rejected if `TargetRefs` is ste.

Reviewer 7: >The `None` mode is useful when overriding on the route level
How would it work if the server is expecting mTLS and the client is not presenting its certificate? or a better way to put it, why would this be useful to get to such scenario? (I do understand that its the client decision but just curios on the usecase)

Author: If the server is expecting mTLS, and you use None mode, then it would likely break unless something outside of the gateway context is adding the TLS.

Reviewer 7: would it be useful for any usecase?

Author: Yes, consider the client is already sending TLS directly so we don't need the gateway infrastructure to do so.

Reviewer: We already have Mode on listeners.  How does this Mode interact with that Mode?

substituted without blocking acceptance of the content of the API change.

The selection of the applicable Gateway API persona is important in the design of BackendTLSPolicy, because it provides
a way to explicitly describe the _expectations_ of the connection to the application.  BackendTLSPolicy is configured
by the application developer Gateway API persona to signal what the application developer _expects_ in connections to
the application, from a TLS perspective.  Only the application developer can know what the application expects, so it is

> important that this configuration be managed by that persona.

Reviewer: Why can't this remain?  It was to clarify how and why the feature should be used.

- An explicit signal that TLS should be used by this connection.
- A hostname the Gateway should use to connect to the backend.
- A reference to one or more certificates to use in the TLS handshake, signed by a CA or self-signed.

> - An indication that system certificates may be used.

Author: Having this as 2 items seems confusing, since there is only really one thing a user is configuring -- the trusted CA certificates.

This might be the same confusion as https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/3835#discussion_r2162713072?

> - An indication that system certificates may be used.

Reviewer: These are 2 specific items in the API, added by request of the community.

- A reference to one or more CA certificates to validate the server's TLS certificates.

BackendTLSPolicy is defined as a Direct Policy Attachment without defaults or overrides, applied to a Service that
accesses the backend in question, where the BackendTLSPolicy resides in the same namespace as the Service it is
applied to.  The BackendTLSPolicy and the Service must reside in the same namespace in order to prevent the
complications involved with sharing trust across namespace boundaries.  We chose the Service resource as a target,
applied to.  For now, the BackendTLSPolicy and the Service must reside in the same namespace in order to prevent the
complications involved with sharing trust across namespace boundaries (see [Future plans](#future-plans)).  We chose the Service resource as a target,
rather than the Route resource, so that we can reuse the same BackendTLSPolicy for all the different Routes that
might point to this Service.
For the use case where certificates are stored in their own namespace, users may create Secrets and use ReferenceGrants
for a BackendTLSPolicy-to-Secret binding.  Implementations must respect a ReferenceGrant for cross-namespace Secret

> sharing to BackendTLSPolicy, even if they don't for other cross-namespace sharing.

Reviewer: Why remove this?

Author: This is not a part of the current implementation, so I was aligning the GEP to reality.

Reviewer: How do you know that none of the 5 implementations implemented this?

Author: It is impossible. The CRD does not have a "namespace" field at all.

other signal that makes the failure sufficiently clear to the requester without revealing too much about the transaction,
based on established security requirements.

> BackendTLSPolicy applies only to TCP traffic. If a policy explicitly attaches to a UDP port of a Service (that is, the `targetRef` has a `sectionName` specifying a single port or the service has only 1 port), the `Accepted: False` Condition with `Reason: Invalid` MUST be set. If the policy attaches to a mix of TCP and UDP ports, implementations SHOULD include a warning in the `Accepted` condition message; the policy will only be effective for the TCP ports.

Author: I think the intent of this PR is to have it be vetted? It has no correlation to the changes in the other GEP which are around consumer overrides

## How a client behaves

|Route has a BackendTLSPolicy| Backend is targeted by a BackendTLSPolicy?    | Connect to backend  with TLS? |
|----------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-------------------------------|
|Mode `TLS`                  | Yes                                           | **Yes**                       |
|Mode `None`                 | Yes                                           | No                            |
|No                          | Yes                                           | **Yes**                       |

> |No                          | No                                            | No                            |

Reviewer: I think you need to keep the original preamble to this diagram, and maybe just add another column to the original diagram.

## How a client behaves

The `BackendTLSPolicy` tells a client "Connect to this service using TLS".
This is unconditional to the type of traffic the gateway client is forwarding.

> For instance, the following will all have the gateway client add TLS:

Author: Because the behavior is now "if there is a backendtlspolicy send TLS" the table is not really useful anymore. The exception is udp which is explicitly called out above

> For instance, the following will all have the gateway client add TLS:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, the following will all have the gateway client add TLS if the backend is targeted by a BackendTLSPolicy:
```

* A Gateway accepts traffic on an HTTP listener
* A Gateway accepts and terminates TLS on an HTTPS listener
* A Gateway accepts traffic on a TCP listener

> * A Gateway accepts traffic with `Mode: Passthrough` on a TLS listener

Reviewer: I disagree.  Passthrough configuration should not consult the BackendTLSPolicy because there should be end-to-end encryption from client to backend for passthrough.

Reviewer 5: @howardjohn While I think I agree with all of the other updates in this GEP, this particular one is hard for me to follow. How would this work?

Reviewer: But which configuration is selected when there are both Passthrough and BackendTLSPolicy?

Reviewer 5: I think the argument here is that both would be honored. The existing TLS connection would be passed through, and _another_ one would be originated on top of that following the instructions of BackendTLSPolicy. That would almost certainly fail, but it's with the goal of predictably following API configuration instead of trying to special case scenarios where configuration is unlikely to be valid.

With all of the above said, it's likely worth adding a note here that implementations can choose not to support BackendTLSPolicy. That decision would be per GatewayClass or Mesh, but not with individual carve outs per TLS termination mode.

Reviewer: The original idea was to add a brand-new, non-existing termination "type" - backend tls termination.  You can't use passthrough with edge termination, can you? Why should we say it's permitted to use passthrough with backend termination?

* A service mesh client accepts HTTP traffic
* A service mesh client accepts TLS traffic
* A service mesh client accepts TCP traffic

Note that there are cases where these patterns may result in multiple layers of TLS on a single connection.

> There may be even cases where the gateway implementation is unaware of this; for example, processing TCPRoute traffic -- the traffic may or may not be TLS, and the gateway would be unaware.

Reviewer: TCPRoute is excluded from this GEP.

Author: This PR is removing the exclusion

Reviewer: TCPRoute and GRPCRotue are excluded in the section marked "Longer Term Goal", with the preamble: "These are worthy goals, but deserve a different GEP for proper attention."

Author: To make the semantic change that "BackendTLSPolicy means to send TLS to the service" (vs today where its conditional based on route type), this inherently applies to route types like TCPRoute and GRPCRoute as well. So this expansion of the GEP seems required.

Its not so much that this GEP now includes TCPRoute/GRPCRoute/etc, its that this GEP now no longer is dependent on routes at all.

i.e. Service, in the cluster based on backendRefs rules of the HTTPRoute **and the TargetRefs of the BackendTLSPolicy**.

## Future plans

In order to scope this GEP, some some changes are deferred to a near-future GEP.
This GEP intends to add the ability for additional control by gateway clients to override TLS settings, following previously established patterns of [consumer and producer policies]([glossary](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/glossary/?h=gloss#producer-route)).
Additionally, more contextual control over when to apply the policies will be explored, to enable use cases like "apply TLS only from this route" ([issue](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/3856)).

While the details of these plans are out of scope for this GEP it is important to be aware of the future plans for the API to ensure the immediate-term plans are future-proofed against the proposed plans.

Implementations should plan for the existence of future fields that may be added that will control where the TLS policy applies.
These may include, but are not limited to:

* `spec.targetRefs.namespace`
* `spec.targetRefs.from`

> * `spec.mode`

Reviewer: Don't forget that we already have [backendTLS](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#gatewaybackendtls) that configures TLS settings for when this Gateway is connecting to backends with TLS.  It overrides BackendTLSPolicy.

Author: I am aware of that field, thanks!
